docs/SECURITY.md, before:

# Security Guide

Mini-Ops is designed to be a lightweight and secure agent for VPS management.

## 🛡️ Core Principles

1.  **Zero Trust**: All requests (except static assets) require a valid `Authorization: Bearer <AUTH_TOKEN>`.
2.  **Least Privilege**: The agent can run as a non-root user (`miniops`), providing only necessary functionality.
3.  **Audit**: Continuous monitoring of security configurations (SSH, UFW, Fail2Ban).

## 🔑 Authentication

### Auth Token
The token is set in the `.env` file:
```env
AUTH_TOKEN=your-random-secure-string-at-least-32-chars
```
We recommend generating a strong token:
```bash
openssl rand -hex 32
```

### Rate Limiting
To protect against brute-force attacks on the API:
- **Login attempts**: Limit of 5 requests per minute per IP.
- **Sensitive actions**: Additional limits on critical endpoints.

## 📝 SSH Monitoring

The agent includes a PAM hook script that catches SSH login events and sends alerts to Telegram.

### How it Works
1.  **PAM Configuration**: The script `scripts/setup_ssh_alerts.sh` adds a call to `pam_exec.so` in `/etc/pam.d/sshd`.
2.  **Hook Script**: When a user logs in, PAM executes `/opt/mini-ops/scripts/ssh-alert.sh`.
3.  **Token Validation**: The hook generates a short-lived TOTP-like token and sends a request to the Mini-Ops API.
4.  **Telegram Alert**: The API verifies the token and sends a message to the administrator.

Does not require exposing the API to the internet (communication happens via `localhost`).

## ⚙️ Hardening Checks

The "Security Audit" section checks:
- **SSH**:
    - Root login disabled (`PermitRootLogin no`).
    - Password authentication disabled (`PasswordAuthentication no`).
    - Non-standard port (not 22).
- **Firewall (UFW)**:
    - Status (Active/Inactive).
    - Open ports.
- **Fail2Ban**:
    - Service status.
    - Active jails.

## 🌐 Network Security

### Recommended Deployment
1.  **Reverse Proxy**: Do not expose port `3000` directly. use Nginx, Caddy, or Cloudflare Tunnel.
2.  **SSL/TLS**: Always use HTTPS in production.
3.  **Firewall**: Allow connections to port `3000` only from `localhost` (if using proxy) or trusted IPs.

### Trusted IPs (Whitelist)
Be sure to configure allowed IP addresses in your firewall or reverse proxy.

Commit message:

feat: автоматизация безопасного деплоя (Nginx reverse proxy) и синхронизация .env
Что сделано:

Безопасность по умолчанию: Приложение mini-ops теперь привязывается исключительно к локальному интерфейсу 127.0.0.1:3000, исключая возможность прямого доступа извне.
Nginx Reverse Proxy: В
bootstrap_server.sh
 добавлена автоматическая установка Nginx. Скрипт самостоятельно генерирует конфигурацию и проксирует запросы на настраиваемый порт 8090 (через DEPLOY_NGINX_PORT).
Синхронизация .env: Скрипт деплоя теперь автоматически загружает локальный файл
.env
 на удаленный сервер по SCP. Если файла нет, используется env.example. Конфигурация дополняется лишь обязательными системными параметрами (APP_HOST и APP_PORT), оставляя пользовательские токены нетронутыми.
Интеллектуальный Firewall (UFW): Автоматически открывается порт Nginx вместо 3000/tcp. Для DEPLOY_MODE=test оставлена логика старого порта.
Security Audit: Анализатор портов (
src/security.rs
) теперь динамически считывает DEPLOY_NGINX_PORT из окружения и не отмечает его как потенциально уязвимый.
Документация: Обновлены файлы
SECURITY.md
 и
SECURITY.ru.md
 в соответствии с новыми стандартами безопасности и логикой синхронизации
.env

docs/SECURITY.md, after:

# Security Guide

Mini-Ops is designed to be a lightweight and secure agent for VPS management.

## 🛡️ Core Principles

1.  **Zero Trust**: All requests (except static assets) require a valid `Authorization: Bearer <AUTH_TOKEN>`.
2.  **Least Privilege**: The agent can run as a non-root user (`miniops`), providing only necessary functionality.
3.  **Audit**: Continuous monitoring of security configurations (SSH, UFW, Fail2Ban).

## 🔑 Authentication

### Auth Token
The token is set in the `.env` file:
```env
AUTH_TOKEN=your-random-secure-string-at-least-32-chars
```
We recommend generating a strong token:
```bash
openssl rand -hex 32
```

### Rate Limiting
To protect against brute-force attacks on the API:
- **Login attempts**: Limit of 5 requests per minute per IP.
- **Sensitive actions**: Additional limits on critical endpoints.

## 📝 SSH Monitoring

The agent includes a PAM hook script that catches SSH login events and sends alerts to Telegram.

### How it Works
1.  **PAM Configuration**: The script `scripts/setup_ssh_alerts.sh` adds a call to `pam_exec.so` in `/etc/pam.d/sshd`.
2.  **Hook Script**: When a user logs in, PAM executes `/opt/mini-ops/scripts/ssh-alert.sh`.
3.  **Token Validation**: The hook generates a short-lived TOTP-like token and sends a request to the Mini-Ops API.
4.  **Telegram Alert**: The API verifies the token and sends a message to the administrator.

Does not require exposing the API to the internet (communication happens via `localhost`).

## ⚙️ Hardening Checks

The "Security Audit" section checks:
- **SSH**:
    - Root login disabled (`PermitRootLogin no`).
    - Password authentication disabled (`PasswordAuthentication no`).
    - Non-standard port (not 22).
- **Firewall (UFW)**:
    - Status (Active/Inactive).
    - Open ports.
- **Fail2Ban**:
    - Service status.
    - Active jails.

## 🌐 Network & Deployment Security

### Automated Secure Deployment
The deployment script (`bootstrap_server.sh`) is designed to be secure by default:
1. **Reverse Proxy (Nginx)**: It automatically installs Nginx and configures it to reverse proxy incoming connections on port `8090` (configurable via `DEPLOY_NGINX_PORT`) to the internal app.
2. **Internal Binding**: The `mini-ops` Rust application is bound strictly to `127.0.0.1:3000`. This prevents any external entity from connecting directly to the application, circumventing the reverse proxy. 
3. **Firewall (UFW)**: Direct access to port `3000` is blocked by default, while port `8090` is explicitly allowed if Nginx automation is used.

### Environment Variable (`.env`) Syncing
The deployment script natively syncs the `.env` file from your local machine to the target server:
- If a `.env` file exists in the project root locally (`/home/aid/PycharmProjects/mini-ops/.env`), it is securely uploaded to the server via SCP, replacing the configuration on the server.
- If no `.env` exists locally, the script falls back to uploading `.env.example` as a template, enabling you to bootstrap the server effortlessly.
- Optional parameters like `TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` will strictly mirror your local setup. Only core networking variables (`APP_HOST`, `APP_PORT`) are forcefully appended to guarantee stable startup.
